Implement Directus Auth in Next.js 14 (#152)
directus-labs/guest-authoring: implement-directus-auth-in-nextjs-14/index.md

---
title: 'Implement Directus Auth in Next.js 14'
description: 'A tutorial on implementing Authentication on a Next.js blog website using Directus as a Headless CMS.'
author:
  name: 'Emmanuel John'
  avatar_file_name: 'profile-photo.jpeg'
---

> ## Introduction
> Next.js is a React.js server-side rendering framework that allows front-end developers to build full-stack applications with a single codebase. It has turborpack the rust-based bundler built-in for enhanced code optimization and fast code compilation. It’s a great choice for performance, efficiency and developer experience. In this tutorial, you will learn how to implement Authentication on a Next.js blog website using Directus as a Headless CMS. You’ll register new users, login, handle refresh tokens, create posts, list all posts, and edit/delete posts where the auth user is the post creator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Introduction
In this tutorial, you will learn how to integrate a Next.js project with Directus Auth. You'll cover registering, logging in, logging out, viewing all posts from all users, creating a post, and editing and deleting posts from your user account.
```

If they hit this page, they know what Next.js is - no need to explain.

## Before You Start
To follow along with this tutorial, you will need the following knowledge and tools:

- [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/download/) v18 and above installed on your computer.

> - A Directus project - you can use [Directus Cloud or run it yourself](https://docs.directus.io/getting-started/quickstart).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A Directus project - follow our [quickstart guide](https://docs.directus.io/blog/docs.directus.io/getting-started/quickstart.html) if you don't already have one.
```

> - Prior experience with Nextjs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Prior experience with Next.js.
```

Can you go through the whole article and make sure you're properly stylizing "Next.js" please?

> - Clone the [project repo](https://github.com/emmanuelhashy/Next-directus-auth-demo) to get the CSS styles for the demo project.

Reviewer: Remove this - this project is meant to be from scratch. Anything you've done manually that needs to be done by the reader needs to be explained right after this list.

Reviewer: Please also remove all styling configuration - 100% of it - from this project. It's not important.

![Directus author role settings](directus-role-settings.png)

Navigate to the Public role settings and in the `directus_users` system collection, configure custom create permissions to allow user creation where `role` equals the Author role `Primary Key` you copied earlier.

![Directus public role field validation settings](public-role-field-validation-settings.png)

Click on `Field Permission` and check the fields required to create a user.

![Directus public role field permission settings](public-role-field-permission-settings.png)

The required fields are:

- first_name
- last_name
- email
- password
- role

**Creating posts collection**
Navigate to `Settings/Data Model` and create a new collection named `posts`. This is where all the posts created by users with an Author role will be stored.

![Directus posts collection setup](Directus-posts-collection-setup.png)

Check the fields that you want returned on the `posts` data

![Directus posts optional fields settings](Directus-posts-optional-fields-settings.png)

Create additional fields for the post:

- title => Input field
- content => WYSIWYG
- image => Image

The `title` and `content` fields should be required.

> ![Directus post additional fields settings](![alt text](Directus-post-additional-fields-settings-1.png)

Reviewer: Could you structure this section the same way as our iOS Auth post? 

```
## Allowing Public Role To Create Users

...

## Creating a New Role
```

```

After the prompts, `create-next-app` will create a folder with your project name and install the required dependencies.

Install the required dependencies:

```bash
    npm i next-auth @directus/sdk
```

## Set Up the ENV Variables

Create a `.env` file in your Next.js project root directory and add the following:

```text
NEXTAUTH_URL=http://localhost:3000
NEXTAUTH_SECRET=YOUR_NEXT_RANDOM_SECRET
USER_ROLE=USER_ROLE_ID_FROM_YOUR_DIRECTUS_PROJECT
BACKEND_URL=YOUR_DIRECTUS_PROJECT_URL
NEXT_PUBLIC_URL=http://localhost:3000
```

You can access your Directus project from the Next.js application via `REST`, `GraphQL` and `SDK`. 

## Set Up the Directus SDK

Create an instance of the Directus SDK that will be used across the next.js application.
In the `next-blog` project `src` directory, create a new directory called `lib` and a new file called `directus.js` inside `lib`, then add the following code:

```javascript
import { createDirectus, rest, authentication } from '@directus/sdk';
const directus = createDirectus(process.env.BACKEND_URL)
  .with(authentication("cookie", {credentials: "include", autoRefresh: true}))
export default directus;
```

> This code snippet sets up a client for interacting with the Directus backend with cookie-based authentication, ensuring that credentials are included in requests and enabling automatic token refresh.

Reviewer: Remove all of this in favor of linking to this document: https://docs.directus.io/guides/headless-cms/build-static-website/next

This post is meant to just be about auth. This has the added benefit of having some collections already set up. Make this a requirement in the **Before You Start**.

Obviously, you won't be able to add the `USER_ROLE` env var yet, but that's ok. Make that a step at the end of the "Creating a New Role" section.

---
title: 'Implement Directus Auth in Next.js 14'
description: 'A tutorial on implementing Authentication on a Next.js blog website using Directus as a Headless CMS.'
author:
  name: 'Emmanuel John'
  avatar_file_name: 'profile-photo.jpeg'
---

## Introduction
In this tutorial, you will learn how to implement Authentication on a Next.js blog website using Directus as a Headless CMS. You’ll register new users, login, handle refresh tokens, create posts, list all posts, and edit/delete posts where the auth user is the post creator.

## Before You Start
To follow along with this tutorial, you will need the following knowledge and tools:

- [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/download/) v18 and above installed on your computer.
- A Directus project - follow our [quickstart guide](https://docs.directus.io/blog/docs.directus.io/getting-started/quickstart.html) if you don't already have one.
- Prior experience with Next.js.

<!-- ## Your Sections Here -->

> ## Allowing Public Role To Create Users
> 
> 1. Navigate to `Settings`.
> 2. Select `Access Control`.
> 3. Click on the `Public Role`.
> 4. Access the `System Collection`.
> 5. Locate `directus_users`.
> 6. Under the `Create` option, choose `Use Custom`.
> 7. Enable field permissions for `first_name`, `last_name`, `role`, `Email` and `Password` options.
> ![Directus public role field permission settings](public-role-field-permission-settings.png)
> 8. Enable field validation where `role` equals the Author role `Primary Key`
> ![Directus public role field validation settings](public-role-field-validation-settings.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Allowing Public Registration

When a user first registers, they will be unauthenticated. In Directus, the permissions of unauthenticated users are controlled by the public role.

In your access control settings open the public role. Find `directus_users` under system collections, and then set custom permissions.

1. In field permissions, enable only `first_name`, `last_name`, `email` and `password` options. If you want users to provide other data at the time of registration, enable the respective field.
2. In field validation, require `first_name`, `last_name`, `email`, and `password` to not be empty.
3. In field presets, set the `role` to the `id` of the author role.

This combination of settings in a custom permission will ensure users provide the required fields, and automatically set the role.
```

Your approach is valid, but it's safer to not expose the role setting to the client. By not allowing the field to be set by the public role, and using a field preset, new users are given the role automatically. 

This section also has to go after the creation of the author role, as it's referenced here.

> ## Creating posts collection
> 
> 1. Navigate to `Settings`.
> 2. Select `Data Model`.
> 3. Create a new collection named `posts`.
> 4. Check the fields that you want returned on the `posts` data
> ![Directus posts optional fields settings](Directus-posts-optional-fields-settings.png)
> 5. Create additional fields for the post:
> 
> - title => Input field
> - content => WYSIWYG
> - image => Image
> The `title` and `content` fields should be required.
> ![Directus post additional fields settings](Directus-post-additional-fields-settings-1.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Creating a Posts Collection

Create a new `posts` collection. Ensure `user_created` is created as an optional field as it will be used to lock down permissions so a user can only edit or delete their own posts. Create the following additional fields:

- `title`: a text input field
- `content`: a WYSIWYG field
- `image`: an image field

- title => Input field
- content => WYSIWYG
- image => Image
```

Required fields, I think, are not strictly required by this project so lets drop the instruction.

> ## Creating a New User Role
> 
> 1. On the Access Control page, click the plus button.
> 2. Name your new role, as `Author`.
> 3. Under the "Posts" collection, enable `Create` and `Read`.
> 4. For `Edit` and `Delete`, select `Use Custom`.
> 5. Add Filter `user_created -> id Equals $CURRENT_USER.id` for both update and delete options.
> 6. This configuration ensures that users can read all posts but are restricted to updating and deleting only their own posts.
> 7. Retrieve the `Primary Key` associated with the `Author` role by selecting the `Author Role` option and then tapping the information icon where you'll be able to copy the `Primary Key`
> 8. On the Access Control page, click `Public`. Click `create` for `directus_users` from the options, then click on `Use custom`. Proceed to `field presets` and paste the Primary Key.
> 
> By following these steps users created by the public role will be given the `Author` role.
> 
> Add the following to your `.env` file:
> 
> ```text
> USER_ROLE=USER_ROLE_ID_FROM_YOUR_DIRECTUS_PROJECT
> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
## Creating a New User Role

Create a new role called `author`. Enable create and read permissions for the `posts` collection. For update and delete permissions, use custom rules and apply the following filter:

```
user_created -> id Equals $CURRENT_USER.id
```

This configuration ensures that users can read all posts but are restricted to updating and deleting only their own posts.

Retrieve the `Primary Key` associated with the `Author` role by selecting the `Author Role` option and then tapping the information icon where you'll be able to copy the `Primary Key`
````

As a field preset is being used, you do not need to expose the role to the client.

## Setting up Layout Configuration

> 

Reviewer: Can this be removed / minimized and just straight into registration? It feels like a lot of boilerplate.

Perhaps start with registration, then login, then altering the UI based on state (the visible nav links), and then protecting routes. Read, create, update, and, finally, delete.

Author: @phazonoverload This is an essential piece of the Next.js App. Removing it will result in an error after a successful login. I'll minimize it instead.

Reviewer: Minimizing is fine :)

      <Link href="/">Return Home</Link>
    </div>
  )
}
export default NotFound
```

## Route Protections

To handle route protection, Create the `post/layout.jsx` file and add the following:

```javascript
"use client"
import { userSession } from "@/lib/action";
import { useRouter } from "next/navigation";
import { useEffect, useState } from "react";

export default function PostLayout({ children }) {
  const [isSuccess, setIsSuccess] = useState(false);
  const router = useRouter();

  useEffect(() => {
    (async () => {
      const user = await userSession();

      if (!user.accessToken) {
        router.push("/login");
        return;
      }

      setIsSuccess(true);
    })();
  }, [router]);

  if (!isSuccess) {
    return <p>Loading...</p>;
  }
  return <div>{children}</div>;
}
```

This will ensure that only authenticated users can access the create post and update post pages.

## Implementing Server Actions for Auth Components

Server Actions are **asynchronous functions** that are executed on the server. They can be used in Server and Client Components to handle form submissions and data mutations in Next.js applications.

> To send user credentials to the `Directus` backend on the user register form submission, navigate to the `lib` directory, create `action.js` file and add the following:

Reviewer: Can you please start this as a minimal file. And then add functions as we get to their respective sections?

```javascript
"use server";
import { revalidatePath } from "next/cache";

> import { directusLogin } from "./auth";

Reviewer: not mentioned elsewhere?

Author: @phazonoverload `directusLogin` is used inside the `login` function in action.js while `revalidatePath` is used in the `addPost` function in action.js.

import {
  createItem,
  createUser,
  deleteItem,
  readItem,
  readItems,
  readMe,
  updateItem,
  uploadFiles,
  withToken,
} from "@directus/sdk";

> import directus from "@/lib/directus";

Reviewer: not mentioned elsewhere?

Author: @phazonoverload  `withToken` is used inside the `getAuthUser` function in action.js. I have removed `uploadFiles` as it's no longer in use.

import { redirect } from "next/navigation";
import { AUTH_USER, COOKIE_NAME } from "@/constants";
import { cookies } from "next/headers";

export const register = async (previousState, formData) => {
  try {
    const { first_name, last_name, email, password } =
      Object.fromEntries(formData);
    const result = await directus.request(
      createUser({
        first_name,
        last_name,
        email,
        password,

>         role: process.env.USER_ROLE,

Reviewer: Remove this - not needed. Also the import.

      status: 500,
    };
  }
};

export const login = async (prevState, formData) => {
  const { email, password } = Object.fromEntries(formData);

  try {
    const user = await directusLogin({ email, password });
    if (user) {
      redirect("/");
    }
  } catch (err) {
    console.log(err);
    if (err.message.includes("Wrong credentials!")) {
      return { error: "Invalid username or password" };
    }
    throw err;
  }
};

export const handleLogout = async () => {
  cookies().delete(AUTH_USER);
  cookies().delete(COOKIE_NAME);
};

export const userSession = async () => {
  const cookieStore = cookies();
  let token = undefined;
  const cookie = cookieStore.get(COOKIE_NAME);
  if (cookie?.value) {
    token = JSON.parse(cookie?.value);
  }

  const user = {};
  if (token != undefined) {
    user.accessToken = token.data.access_token;
    user.refreshToken = token.data.refresh_token;
    getAuthUser(token)
  }
  return user;
};

export const getAuthUser = async (token) => {
  const userData = await directus.request(
    withToken(
      token.data.access_token,
      readMe({
        fields: ["*"],
      })
    )
  );
  return userData;
};
```

> These functions handle user logout, registration, login and users session using the Directus SDK.

Reviewer: Can you spend a sentence explaining the userSession function a bit more

> ## Creating the Auth Pages

Reviewer: This whole section is a bit jarring in how it's structured. Can we remove this H2 and have two H2s instead: "Implementing Registration" and "Implementing Login". Under each, see each to it's conclusion. It doesn't need to have subheadings, but structurally I would something like this

- Server action
- Form
- Page
- Test

        {state?.error}
      </form>
    </div>
  );
};
export default CreatePostForm;
```

The `CreatePostForm` component provides a form for creating a new post. When the form is submitted, it calls the `addPost` function to add the post to the Directus backend. The form state is managed using the `useFormState` hook.

With the above implementation, registered users should be able to create new posts.
Navigate to `http://localhost:3000/create-post` in your browser and you should see the following:

![Create post](create-post.png)

## Create Blog Post Listing

To render a list of all blog posts, you need to send a request to the Directus backend to fetch all post data from the posts collection created earlier in the Directus project.

Navigate to `lib/action.js` and add the following:

```javascript
//src/lib/action.js
export const getPosts = async () => {
  try {
    const result = await directus.request(
      readItems("posts", {
        fields: [
          "title",
          "id",
          "image.*",
          "content",
          "date_created",
          "user_created.*",
        ],
      })
    );
    return result;
  } catch (error) {
    console.log(error);
  }
};
```

> The `getPosts` function makes a request to Directus using the `directus.request()` method, specifying to read items from the "posts" collection. Within the request, it specifies the fields to retrieve for each post. The asterisk signifies all fields under its associated field.

Reviewer: Remove - this is a safe assumption of existing knowledge.

  }

  const handleDelete = async (data) => {
    "use server";
    const postId = data.get("postId");
    await deletePost(postId)
    redirect('/blog')
  };

  return (
    <div>
      {post.image && (
        <div>
          <img src={post.image ? `${directus.url}assets/${post.image.filename_disk}?width=400` : "/noavatar.png" } alt="" fill/>
        </div>
      )}
      <div>
        <h1>{post.title}</h1>
        <div>
          {post && (
            <Suspense fallback={<div>Loading...</div>}>
              <PostUser user={post.user_created} />
            </Suspense>
          )}
          <div>
            <span>Published</span>
            <span>
              {post.date_created.toString().slice(3, 16)}
            </span>
          </div>
          {user?.id === post?.user_created?.id &&  <div>
            <Link href={`/post/update-post/${post.id}`}>Edit</Link>
            <form action={handleDelete}>
            <input name="postId" style={{visibility: "hidden"}} value={post?.id}/>
            <input name="userId" style={{visibility: "hidden"}} value={user?.id}/>
            <button >Delete</button>
          </form>
          </div>}
        </div>

>         <div dangerouslySetInnerHTML={{ __html: post.content }}></div>

Reviewer: Please make note that this can only be used for trusted content.
